gh-123672: Clarify the usage of `PyGILState*` for subinterpreters (#123728)
python/cpython: Doc/c-api/init.rst

Note that the ``PyGILState_*`` functions assume there is only one global
interpreter (created automatically by :c:func:`Py_Initialize`).  Python
supports the creation of additional interpreters (using
:c:func:`Py_NewInterpreter`), but switching between interpreters via the

> ``PyGILState_*`` API is unsupported. On the other hand, *creating*
> sub-interpreters (whether they have a per-interpreter GIL or not, in
> the sense of :pep:`684`) still require to hold the GIL.

Reviewer: I don't think the note about creating interpreters should be *here*.
```suggestion
``PyGILState_*`` API is unsupported.
```
I think it belongs to [`Py_NewInterpreterFromConfig`](https://docs.python.org/3.14/c-api/init.html#c.Py_NewInterpreterFromConfig) -- but, it turns out it's already there:

> Like all other Python/C API functions, the global interpreter lock must be held before calling this function and is still held when it returns.

---

Also, for future reference: PEPs become *historical documents* when they're finalized. It's OK to link to them for background information or for reasoning behind a change, but for the current state, you should link to docs. (That would have been [`PyInterpreterConfig.gil`](https://docs.python.org/3.14/c-api/init.html#c.PyInterpreterConfig.gil) in this case.)

---

Looking at what remains with my suggestion -- changing:
> mixing multiple interpreters and the ``PyGILState_*`` API is unsupported.

to:
> switching between interpreters via the ``PyGILState_*`` API is unsupported.

That would mean it's OK to use ``PyGILState_Ensure`` without the GIL held, but *while* multiple interpreters are active.
I don't think we want to call that supported, at least without clarifying (and testing) *which* intprpreter you end in after calling `PyGILState_Ensure`. Because if you end up in an unexpected one, things can get messy -- for starters, all your `PyObject*` references are invalid.

Author: > I don't think we want to call that supported, at least without clarifying (and testing) which intprpreter you end in after calling PyGILState_Ensure

I think that would be better fit for the `PyGILState_Ensure` documentation -- we only need to change things here because it kept getting misinterpreted by people using subinterpreters to get around the GIL.

Author: After some testing, I think the `Py_NewInterpreterFromConfig` docs are wrong?

It says that the GIL is still held when it returns, which I interpreted as "you still need to call `PyGILState_Release`." But it seems that using a per-interpreter GIL releases the old one, and then switches to the new one.

For example (error checking omitted):

```c
#include <Python.h>
#include <pthread.h>
#define THREADS 10

static PyInterpreterConfig config = {
    .allow_threads = 1,
    .check_multi_interp_extensions = 1,
    .gil = PyInterpreterConfig_OWN_GIL,
};

void *thread_start(void *arg)
{
    PyGILState_STATE gil = PyGILState_Ensure();
    PyThreadState *tstate = NULL;
    Py_NewInterpreterFromConfig(&tstate, &config);
    PyObject *code = Py_CompileString("print(1)", __FILE__, Py_eval_input);
    PyObject *globals = PyDict_New();
    PyEval_EvalCode(code, globals, globals);
    Py_EndInterpreter(tstate);
    return NULL;
}

int main(void)
{
    Py_Initialize();
    pthread_t threads[THREADS];

    for (int i = 0; i < THREADS; ++i)
        pthread_create(&threads[i], NULL, thread_start, NULL);

    Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS;
    for (int i = 0; i < THREADS; ++i)
        pthread_join(threads[i], NULL);
    Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS;

    Py_Finalize();
    return 0;
}
```

I would have expected the above to deadlock, but it seems to work just fine. In fact, releasing `gil` causes it to break.

Note that the ``PyGILState_*`` functions assume there is only one global
interpreter (created automatically by :c:func:`Py_Initialize`).  Python
supports the creation of additional interpreters (using
:c:func:`Py_NewInterpreter`), but switching between interpreters via the

> ``PyGILState_*`` API is unsupported.  If you call ``PyGILState_Ensure``
> in order to create a sub-interpreter, you must never try and interact
> with the GIL of other interpreters (including trying to release the GIL
> to return back to the previous interpreter).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``PyGILState_*`` API is unsupported.  Similiarly, after creating a
sub-interpreter via :c:func:`!PyGILState_Ensure`, interacting with
the GIL of other interpreters (including, but not limited to trying
to release the GIL to return back to the previous interpreter) is not
supported.
```

Did I understand correctly?

> :c:func:`Py_NewInterpreter`), but switching between interpreters via the
> ``PyGILState_*`` API is unsupported. With that being said, you still need
> to hold the :term:`GIL` in order to *create* a subinterpreter, even if using
> a per-interpreter GIL (see :pep:`684`). The need for :c:type:`PyGILState_STATE`
> doesn't go away when creating isolated subinterpreters!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:c:func:`Py_NewInterpreter`), but switching between interpreters via the
``PyGILState_*`` API is unsupported. On the other hand, *creating*
sub-interpreters (whether they have a per-interprter GIL or not in
the sense of :pep:`684`) still require to hold the :term:`GIL`.
```

We are less enthusiastic in documentation in general. By the way, `PyGILState_STATE` is not documented but could be done in a separate PR.

Author: I think that's intentional. `PyGILState_Ensure` explicitly documents `PyGILState_STATE` as "opaque."

Reviewer 2: Yes, but we can make a link to say that it's the public type of the opaque handle. (it could be a very short sentence but let's discuss it in a follow-up PR if needed)

Note that the ``PyGILState_*`` functions assume there is only one global
interpreter (created automatically by :c:func:`Py_Initialize`).  Python
supports the creation of additional interpreters (using
:c:func:`Py_NewInterpreter`), but switching between interpreters via the

> ``PyGILState_*`` API is unsupported.  Similiarly, after creating a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``PyGILState_*`` API is unsupported.  Similarly, after creating a
```

sub-interpreter via :c:func:`!PyGILState_Ensure`, interacting with

> the GIL of other interpreters (including, but not limited to trying

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the GIL of other interpreters (including, but not limited to, trying
```

Minor nitpick. I am not an English native, but I should have put a comma after "to" (sorry for my previous suggestion missing it). Alternatively, I think it is also possible to have no comma at all (i.e. neither after "including" nor after "to").

Author: I like commas when writing, they help keep "flow." I'm not too familiar with how the docs are supposed to be written, though -- maybe it's better to avoid them.

supports the creation of additional interpreters (using
:c:func:`Py_NewInterpreter`), but switching between interpreters via the
``PyGILState_*`` API is unsupported. On the other hand, *creating*

> sub-interpreters (whether they have a per-interpreter :term:`GIL` or not in

Reviewer 2: I've looked at the rest of the paragraph and I don't think we linkify the GIL so you can simply keep `GIL` for both occurrences. I'm going to sleep (it's 2 AM here) but otherwise I think it's fine (if what I rephrased was indeed what you expected).

Author: Ok, will do.

   Ensure that the current thread is ready to call the Python C API regardless
   of the current state of Python, or of the global interpreter lock. This may
   be called as many times as desired by a thread as long as each call is
   matched with a call to :c:func:`PyGILState_Release`, *except* when the

>    thread creates a sub-interpreter with it's own :term:`GIL` (see :c:member:`PyInterpreterConfig.gil`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   thread creates a sub-interpreter with its own GIL (see
   :c:member:`PyInterpreterConfig.gil`).
```

Reviewer 2: GIL wasn't linkified before so let's not do it here.

>    In that case, the call to :c:func:`PyGILState_Release` should be replaced with :c:func:`Py_EndInterpreter`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   In that case, :c:func:`PyGILState_Release` should be used instead of
   :c:func:`Py_EndInterpreter` to release that interpreter's GIL.
```

Author: I should read suggestions before committing them :sweat_smile:

`Py_EndInterpreter` and `PyGILState_Release` should be swapped here. If the thread creates a subinterpreter, `Py_EndInterpreter` will release the GIL. If you call `PyGILState_Release` instead, then you no longer have the GIL, and can't end the subinterpreter.

Reviewer 2: Ah no it's my bad, sorry :(

   When the function returns, the current thread will hold the GIL and be able
   to call arbitrary Python code.  Failure is a fatal error.

   If sub-interpreters are active, this function puts you in the global
   interpreter (created by :c:func:`Py_Initialize`). If you create a sub-interpreter

>    right after you call this function, then the current thread is switched to that

Reviewer 2: By "current thread", you mean the thread's interpreter state?

Author: Yeah, I'll fix that.

   sub-interpreter, and you no longer have the :c:type:`PyGILState_STATE` of the global
   interpreter. In which case, you must call :c:func:`Py_EndInterpreter` instead of

>    :c:func:`PyGILState_Release`.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand "In which case, you must call [...]". Does it mean this:

```C
/* switches to global interpreter, thread is using the global interpreter's state */
PyGILState_Ensure();
/* create a sub-interpreter */
...
/* thread is using the sub-interpreter's state */
do_something_else();
/* need to end my sub-interpreter like this ? */
Py_EndInterpreter(); 
```

Author: Yup. How should it be reworded?

Reviewer 2: I don't know... I would've personally wanted a rewording but I don't have the energy now to suggest one. I'm also unusure whether `you` should be used in this paragraph (that's why I reformulated the other text to remove the "you"; I don't think the "you" is used elsewhere).

Author: Hmm, ok. I'll see what I can come up with a little later today.

Author: I just pushed an update, is it more clear?

Reviewer 2: I'll read it tomorrow. It's 2:32 AM now xD

Author: Dude, weren't you setting labels like an hour ago? Your dedication is impressive :stuck_out_tongue:

Reviewer 2: Labels are easy to set! (I'm just setting labels while waiting in the lobby...)

Author: Yeah, I would rather be asleep than trying to deal with the issue tracker at 1:30 AM :wink:. Anyways, let me know when you get a chance to look at this.

Reviewer 2: You'll get a review by Sunday morning (New York time)!
